Automatic number plate recognition (A N P R) is a mass surveillance method that uses optical character recognition on images to read vehicle registration plates. They can use existing closed-circuit television or road-rule enforcement cameras, or ones specifically designed for the task. They are used by various police forces and as a method of electronic toll collection on pay-per-use roads and cataloging the movements of traffic or individuals.A N P R can be used to store the images captured by the cameras as well as the text from the license plate, with some configurable to store a photograph of the driver. Systems commonly use infrared lighting to allow the camera to take the picture at any time of the day. A N P R technology tends to be region-specific, owing to plate variation from place to place.Development historyA N P R was invented in 1976 at the Police Scientific Development Branch in the UK. Prototype systems were working by 1979, and contracts were let to produce industrial systems, first at EMI Electronics, and then at Computer Recognition Systems (CRS) in Wokingham, UK. Early trial systems were deployed on the A1 road and at the Dartford Tunnel. However it did not become widely used until new developments in cheaper and easier to use software was pioneered during the 1990s. The first arrest through detection of a stolen car was made in 1981 and the first documented case of A N P R in helping solve a murder occurred in November 2005 after the murder of Sharon Beshenivsky, in which City of Bradford based A N P R played a vital role in locating and subsequently convicting her killers.During the 1990s, significant advances in technology took automatic number plate recognition (A N P R) systems from limited expensive, hard to set up, fixed based applications to simple "point and shoot" mobile ones. This was made possible by the creation of software that ran on cheaper PC based, non-specialist hardware that also no longer needed to be given the pre-defined angles, direction, size and speed in which the plates would be passing the cameras field of view. Further scaled-down components at more cost-effective price points led to a record number of deployments by law enforcement agencies around the world. Smaller cameras with the ability to read license plates at higher speeds, along with smaller, more durable processors that fit in the trunks of police vehicles, allowed law enforcement officers to patrol daily with the benefit of license plate reading in real time, when they can interdict immediately.TechnologyA N P R uses optical character recognition (OCR) on images taken by cameras. The software aspect of the system runs on standard home computer hardware and can be linked to other applications or databases. It first uses a series of image manipulation techniques to detect, normalize and enhance the image of the number plate, and then optical character recognition (OCR) to extract the alphanumerics of the license plate. A N P R systems are generally deployed in one of two basic approaches: one allows for the entire process to be performed at the lane location in real-time, and the other transmits all the images from many lanes to a remote computer location and performs the OCR process there at some later point in time. When done at the lane site, the information captured of the plate alphanumeric, date-time, lane identification, and any other information required is completed in approximately 250 milliseconds. This information can easily be transmitted to a remote computer for further processing if necessary, or stored at the lane for later retrieval. In the other arrangement, there are typically large numbers of PCs used in a server farm to handle high workloads, such as those found in the London congestion charge project. Often in such systems, there is a requirement to forward images to the remote server, and this can require larger bandwidth transmission media.At the front end of any A N P R system is the imaging hardware which captures the image of the license plates. The initial image capture forms a critically important part of the A N P R system which, in accordance to the Garbage In, Garbage Out principle of computing, will often determine the overall performance.License plate capture is typically performed by specialized cameras designed specifically for the task, although new software techniques are being implemented that support any I.P. based surveillance camera and increase the utility of A N P R for perimeter security applications. Factors which pose difficulty for license plate imaging cameras include speed of the vehicles being recorded, varying ambient lighting conditions, headlight glare and harsh environmental conditions. Most dedicated license plate capture cameras will incorporate infrared illumination in order to solve the problems of lighting and plate reflectivity.Many countries now use license plates that are retroreflective. This returns the light back to the source and thus improves the contrast of the image. In some countries, the characters on the plate are not reflective, giving a high level of contrast with the reflective background in any lighting conditions. A camera that makes use of active infrared imaging (with a normal color filter over the lens and an infrared illuminator next to it) benefits greatly from this as the infrared waves are reflected back from the plate. This is only possible on dedicated A N P R cameras, however, and so cameras used for other purposes must rely more heavily on the software capabilities. Further, when a full-color image is required as well as use of the A N P R-retrieved details it is necessary to have one infrared-enabled camera and one normal (color) camera working together.To avoid blurring it is ideal to have the shutter speed of a dedicated camera set to 1/1000 of a second. Because the car is moving, slower shutter speeds could result in an image which is too blurred to read using the OCR software, especially if the camera is much higher up than the vehicle. In slow-moving traffic, or when the camera is at a lower level and the vehicle is at an angle approaching the camera, the shutter speed does not need to be so fast. Shutter speeds of 1/500 of a second can cope with traffic moving up to 40 mph (64 km/h) and 1/250 of a second up to 5 mph (8 km/h). License plate capture cameras can now produce usable images from vehicles traveling at 120 mph (190 km/h).To maximize the chances of effective license plate capture, installers should carefully consider the positioning of the camera relative to the target capture area. Exceeding threshold angles of incidence between camera lens and license plate will greatly reduce the probability of obtaining usable images due to distortion. Manufacturers have developed tools to help eliminate errors from the physical installation of license plate capture cameras.A N P R ProcessThe A N P R process is divided into three steps. The detection of the vehicle, the capture of the images and the recognition process. 1.Detection of the vehicle. The first step is to take an image of the vehicle at the right time. Thus, the number plate of the vehicle will be visible in the image. Nowadays, three kind of triger control existHardware triger: The A N P R equipment controls physically a sensor directly installed in the lane. Whenever a vehicle has been detected by the sensor, the A N P R equipment will know its presence, and then the process of the capture beginsSoftware triger: The A N P R equipment communicates with the client application, who physically controls a sensor directlly installed in the lane. Whenever a vehicle has been detected by the sensor, the client application knows the presence of the vehicle and communicates it to the A N P R equipment. At this moment the process of the capture begins.Free flow: The A N P R equipment does not need to receive signal from any external sensor. The A N P R equipment takes images continuously and it is able to detect the vehicles automatically.2. Capture of the images. In this step hardware captures the image of the license plates. Once the vehicle is detected, the following step is the capture of the vehicle. In order to take a right image, the following points will have to be considered.Type of cameras:Interlace camera: The capture of the images is made in two steps. First uneven lines and later the even lines (click to see example). This type of cameras are cheaper but its use is not recommended for A N P R because if the vehicle is in movement, the number plate appears defocused Progressive cameras: The capture of imagines is made at once (click to see example). The use of this type of cameras is totally recommended because if the vehicle is in movement the number plate always appears focused.2.2 Type of light. Infrared light is used generally for the A N P R equipment. Although some A N P R equipment are able to use the daylight and the infrared light during the night.Infrared light: The A N P R systems uses infrared light because the human eye cannot detect it without other devices. One infrared filter located in the camera allows to emphasize the number plate, but, in the other hand, the rest of elements of the image are darkenedDaylight: It is perceived by the human eye. It allows to take images in which the vehicle is distinguishedLight management: The type of light is as important as how it is managed. It is possible to use any typical technique of photography, but the A N P R manufacturers have chosen two great ways:To control the light emitted by the focusTo control the light that enters in the camera3. Number plate recognition process. In this step computer processes the resulting image to obtain number plate information. Each A N P R manufacturer has developed its own recognition algorithms, although structure of this algorithms one and the same.Algorithm structureThere are seven primary parts of a recognition algorithm that the software requires for identifying a license plate:Plate localization – responsible for finding and isolating the plate on the picture.Plate orientation and sizing – compensates for the skew of the plate and adjusts the dimensions to the required size.Normalization – adjusts the brightness and contrast of the image.Character segmentation – finds the individual characters on the plates.Optical character recognition.Syntactical/Geometrical analysis – check characters and positions against country-specific rules.The averaging of the recognized value over multiple fields or images to produce a more reliable or confident result. Especially since any single image may contain a reflected light flare, be partially obscured or other temporary effect.The complexity of each of these subsections of the program determines the accuracy of the system. During the third phase (normalization), some systems use edge detection techniques to increase the picture difference between the letters and the plate backing. A median filter may also be used to reduce the visual noise on the image.DifficultiesThere are a number of possible difficulties that the software must be able to cope with. These include:Poor File resolution, usually because the plate is too far away but sometimes resulting from the use of a low-quality camera.Blurry images, particularly motion blur.Poor lighting and low contrast due to overexposure, reflection or shadows.An object obscuring (part of) the plate, quite often a tow bar, or dirt on the plate.A different font, popular for vanity plates (some countries do not allow such plates, eliminating the problem).Circumvention techniques.Lack of coordination between countries or states. Two cars from different countries or states can have the same number but different design of the plate.While some of these problems can be corrected within the software, it is primarily left to the hardware side of the system to work out solutions to these difficulties. Increasing the height of the camera may avoid problems with objects (such as other vehicles) obscuring the plate but introduces and increases other problems, such as the adjusting for the increased skew of the plate.On some cars, tow bars may obscure one or two characters of the license plate. Bikes on bike racks can also obscure the number plate, though in some countries and jurisdictions, such as Victoria, Australia, "bike plates" are supposed to be fitted. Some small-scale systems allow for some errors in the license plate. When used for giving specific vehicles access to a barricaded area, the decision may be made to have an acceptable error rate of one character. This is because the likelihood of an unauthorized car having such a similar license plate is seen as quite small. However, this level of inaccuracy would not be acceptable in most applications of an A N P R system.AccuracyA 2008 article in Parking Trend International discussed a disparity in claimed vs. experienced license plate recognition read rates, with manufacturers claiming that their recognition engines can correctly report 98% of the time, although customers experience only 90% to 94% success, even with new equipment under perfect conditions. Early systems were reportedly only 60% to 80% reliable.True system error rate is the product of its subsystem error rates (image capture, license plate image extraction, LP image interpretation); slight increases in subsystem error rates can produce dramatic reductions of read rates. The effects of real-world interfering factors on read rate are not uniformly specified or tested by manufacturers. The article states "there is a need for the industry to adopt a standard performance measurement protocol to enable potential customers assess the best fit for their particular requirements."Many A N P R systems claim accuracy when trained to match plates from a single jurisdiction or region, but can fail when trying to recognize plates from other jurisdictions due to variations in format, font, color, layout, and other plate features.For maximum effectiveness, an A N P R system should be able to recognize plates from any jurisdiction, and the jurisdiction to which they are associated, but these many variables make such tasks difficult.ApplicationAn early, private sector mobile A N P R application has been applications for vehicle repossession and recovery), although the application of A N P R by private companies to collect information from privately owned vehicles or collected from private property (for example, driveways) has become an issue of sensitivity and public debate. Other A N P R uses include parking enforcement, and revenue collection from individuals who are delinquent on city or state taxes or fines. The technology is often featured in the reality TV show Parking Wars featured on A&E Network. In the show, tow truck drivers and booting teams use the A N P R to find delinquent vehicles with high amounts of unpaid parking fines.Also A N P R is used for speed limit enforcement. This works by tracking vehicles' travel time between two fixed points, and calculating the average speed. These cameras are claimed to have an advantage over traditional speed cameras in maintaining steady legal speeds over extended distances, rather than encouraging heavy braking on approach to specific camera locations and subsequent acceleration back to illegal speeds.Recent innovations have contributed to the adoption of A N P R for perimeter security and access control applications at government facilities. Within the US, "homeland security" efforts to protect against alleged "acts of terrorism" have resulted in adoption of A N P R for sensitive facilities such as embassies, schools, airports, maritime ports, military and federal buildings, law enforcement and government facilities, and transportation centers. A N P R is marketed as able to be implemented through networks of IP based surveillance cameras that perform "double duty" alongside facial recognition, object tracking, and recording systems for the purpose of monitoring suspicious or anomalous behavior, improving access control, and matching against watch lists. A N P R systems are most commonly installed at points of significant sensitivity, ingress or egress. Major US agencies such as the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice, the Department of Transportation and the Department of Defense have purchased A N P R for perimeter security applications. Large networks of A N P R systems are being installed by cities such as Boston, London and New York City to provide citywide protection against acts of terrorism, and to provide support for public gatherings and public spaces.In addition to government facilities, many private sector industries with facility security concerns are beginning to implement A N P R solutions. Examples include casinos, hospitals, museums, parking facilities, and resorts. In the US, private facilities typically cannot access government or police watch lists, but may develop and match against their own databases for customers, VIPs, critical personnel or "banned person" lists. In addition to providing perimeter security, private A N P R has service applications for valet / recognized customer and VIP recognition, logistics and key personnel tracking, sales and advertising, parking management, and logistics (vendor and support vehicle tracking).Many cities and districts have developed traffic control systems to help monitor the movement and flow of vehicles around the road network. This had typically involved looking at historical data, estimates, observations and statistics such as:Car park usagePedestrian crossing usageNumber of vehicles along a roadAreas of low and high congestionFrequency, location and cause of road worksCCTV cameras can be used to help traffic control centers by giving them live data, allowing for traffic management decisions to be made in real-time. By using A N P R on this footage it is possible to monitor the travel of individual vehicles, automatically providing information about the speed and flow of various routes. These details can highlight problem areas as and when they occur and helps the centre to make informed incident management decisions.To jump a red light is a really dangerous infraction with consequences for others drivers and pedestrians.Nowadays, it is possible to control when a vehicle jumps a red light. This systems combinate sensors and image capture equipment, such as cameras or video recorders.The A N P R systems reinforce the red light control systems. Thanks to A N P R technology the fine process can be done automatically.ControversyThe introduction of A N P R systems has led to fears of misidentification and the furthering of 1984-style surveillance. In the United States, some such as Gregg Easterbrook oppose what they call "machines that issue speeding tickets and red-light tickets" as the beginning of a slippery slope towards an automated justice system:"A machine classifies a person as an offender, and you can't confront your accuser because there is no accuser... can it be wise to establish a principle that when a machine says you did something illegal, you are presumed guilty?"Similar criticisms have been raised in other countries. Easterbrook also argues that this technology is employed to maximize revenue for the state, rather than to promote safety. The electronic surveillance system produces tickets which in the US are often in excess of $100, and are virtually impossible for a citizen to contest in court without the help of an attorney. The revenues generated by these machines are shared generously with the private corporation that builds and operates them, creating a strong incentive to tweak the system to generate as many tickets as possible.Older systems had been notably unreliable; in the UK this has been known to lead to charges being made incorrectly with the vehicle owner having to pay £10 in order to be issued with proof (or not) of the offense. Improvements in technology have drastically decreased error rates, but false accusations are still frequent enough to be a problem.Perhaps the best known incident involving the abuse of an A N P R database in North America is the case of Edmonton Sun reporter Kerry Diotte in 2004. Diotte wrote an article critical of Edmonton police use of traffic cameras for revenue enhancement, and in retaliation was added to an A N P R database of "high-risk drivers" in an attempt to monitor his habits and create an opportunity to arrest him. The police chief and several officers were fired as a result, and The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada expressed public concern over the "growing police use of technology to spy on motorists."Other concerns include the storage of information that could be used to identify people and store details about their driving habits and daily life, contravening the Data Protection Act along with similar legislation (see personally identifiable information). The laws in the UK are strict for any system that uses CCTV footage and can identify individuals.Also of concern is the safety of the data once it is mined, following the discovery of police surveillance records lost in a gutter.There is also a case in the UK for saying that use of A N P R cameras is against the law under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. The breach exists, some say, in the fact that A N P R is used to monitor the activities of law-abiding citizens and treats everyone like the suspected criminals intended to be surveyed under the act. The police themselves have been known to refer to the system of A N P R as a "24/7 traffic movement database" which is a diversion from its intended purpose of identifying vehicles involved in criminal activities. The opposing viewpoint is that where the plates have been cloned, a 'read' of an innocent motorist's vehicle will allow the elimination of that vehicle from an investigation by visual examination of the images stored. Likewise, stolen vehicles are read by A N P R systems between the time of theft and report to the Police, assisting in the investigation.The Associated Press reported in August 2011 that New York Police Department cars and license plate tracking equipment purchased with federal HIDTA (High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area) funds were used to spy on Muslims at mosques, and to track the license plate numbers of worshipers.  Police in unmarked cars outfitted with electronic license plate readers would drive down the street and automatically catalog the plates of everyone parked near the mosque, amassing a covert database that would be distributed among officers and used to profile Muslims in public.In 2013 the American Civil Liberties Union released 26,000 pages of data about A N P R systems obtained from local, state, and federal agencies through freedom of information laws. "The documents paint a startling picture of a technology deployed with too few rules that is becoming a tool for mass routine location tracking and surveillance" wrote the ACLU. The ACLU reported that in many locations the devices were being used to store location information on vehicles which were not suspected of any particular offense. "Private companies are also using license plate readers and sharing the information they collect with police with little or no oversight or privacy protections. A lack of regulation means that policies governing how long our location data is kept vary widely," the ACLU said. In 2012 the ACLU filed suit against the Department of Homeland Security, which funds many local and state A N P R programs thought grants, after the agency failed to provide access to records the ACLU had requested under the Freedom of Information Act about the programs.Circumvention techniquesVehicle owners have used a variety of techniques in an attempt to evade A N P R systems and road-rule enforcement cameras in general. One method increases the reflective properties of the lettering and makes it more likely that the system will be unable to locate the plate or produce a high enough level of contrast to be able to read it. This is typically done by using a plate cover or a spray, though claims regarding the effectiveness of the latter are disputed. In most jurisdictions, the covers are illegal and covered under existing laws, while in most countries there is no law to disallow the use of the sprays. Other users have attempted to smear their license plate with dirt or utilize covers to mask the plate.If an A N P R system cannot read the plate it can flag the image for attention, with the human operators looking to see if they are able to identify the alphanumerics.In order to avoid surveillance or penalty charges, there has been an upsurge in car cloning. This is usually achieved by copying registration plates from another car of a similar model and age. This can be difficult to detect, especially as cloners may change the registration plates and travel behavior to hinder investigations.A N P R in different states1.United StatesIn the United States, A N P R systems are more commonly referred to as ALPR (Automatic License Plate Reader/Recognition) technology, due to differences in language (i.e. "number plates" are referred to as "license plates" in American English)Mobile A N P R use is widespread among US law enforcement agencies at the city, county, state and Federal level. According to a 2012 report by the Police Executive Research Forum, approximately 71% of all US police departments utilize some form of A N P R. Mobile A N P R is becoming a significant component of municipal predictive policing strategies and intelligence gathering, as well as for recovery of stolen vehicles, identification of wanted felons, and revenue collection from individuals who are delinquent on city or state taxes or fines, or monitoring for "Amber Alerts". Successfully recognized plates may be matched against databases including "wanted person", "protection order", missing person, gang member, known and suspected terrorist, supervised release, immigration violator, and National Sex Offender lists. In addition to the real-time processing of license plate numbers, ALPR systems in the US collect (and can indefinitely store) data from each license plate capture. Images, dates, times and GPS coordinates can be stockpiled and can help place a suspect at a scene, aid in witness identification, pattern recognition or the tracking of individuals.An early, private sector mobile A N P R application has been applications for vehicle repossession and recovery), although the application of A N P R by private companies to collect information from privately owned vehicles or collected from private property (for example, driveways) has become an issue of sensitivity and public debate. Other ALPR uses include parking enforcement, and revenue collection from individuals who are delinquent on city or state taxes or fines. The technology is often featured in the reality TV show Parking Wars featured on A&E Network. In the show, tow truck drivers and booting teams use the ALPR to find delinquent vehicles with high amounts of unpaid parking fines.2. United KingdomThe UK has an extensive automatic number plate recognition (A N P R) CCTV network. Police and security services use it to track UK vehicle movements in real time. The resulting data are stored for 2 years in the National A N P R Data Centre to be analyzed for intelligence and to be used as evidence.Following the formation of the Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition after the 2010 General Election, it was announced in July 2010 that the system is to be placed under statutory regulation. This is likely to establish a right in law to collect the data, and place controls on its use, storage and access by third parties. The Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 was enacted in order to provide for tighter regulation of A N P R.Since March 2006, most motorways, main roads, town centers, London's congestion charge zone, ports and petrol station forecourts have been covered by CCTV camera networks using automatic number plate recognition. Existing traffic cameras in towns and cities are being converted to read number plates automatically as part of the new national surveillance network."What we're trying to do as far as we can is to stitch together the existing camera network rather than install a huge number of new cameras," - Mr Whiteley chairman of the A N P R steering committee said.Some cameras may be disguised for covert operations but the majority will be ordinary CCTV traffic cameras converted to read number plates. Every police force will also have a fleet of specially fitted police vans with A N P R cameras. All data generated is fed to The National A N P R Data Centre.One camera can cover many motorway lanes. Just two A N P R devices, for instance, cover north and south movements through the 27 lanes of the Dartford crossing toll area on the Thames. Whiteley said the intention eventually was to move from the "low thousands" of cameras to the "high thousands".3. AustraliaSeveral State Police Forces, and the Department of Justice (Victoria) utilize both fixed and mobile A N P R systems. The New South Wales Police Force Highway Patrol were the first to trial and use a fixed A N P R camera system in Australia in 2005. In 2009 they began a roll-out of a mobile A N P R system (known officially as MA N P R) with three infrared cameras fitted to its Highway Patrol fleet. The system identifies unregistered and stolen vehicles as well as disqualified or suspended drivers as well as other 'persons of interest' such as persons having outstanding warrants.4. NetherlandsAverage speed cameras (trajectcontrole) are in place in the Netherlands since 2002. As of July 2009, 12 such cameras are operating, mostly in the west of the country and along the A12.Some of these are divided in several “sections” to allow for cars leaving and entering the motorway.A first experimental system was tested on a short stretch of the A2 in 1997 and was deemed a big success by the police, reducing over speeding to 0.66%, compared to 5 to 6% when regular speed cameras were used at the same location. The first permanent average speed cameras were installed on the A13 in 2002, shortly after the speed limit was reduced to 80 km/h to limit noise and air pollution in the area. In 2007, average speed cameras resulted in 1.7 million fines for over speeding out of a total of 9.7 millions. According to the Dutch Attorney General, the average number of violation of the speed limits on motorway sections equipped with average speed cameras is between 1 and 2%, compared to 10 to 15% elsewhere.5. France180 gantries over major roads have been built throughout the country. These together with a further 250 fixed cameras is to enable a levy of an eco tax on lorries over 3.5 tones. The system is currently being opposed and whilst they may be collecting data on vehicles passing the cameras, no eco tax is being charged.Contens:IntroductionDevelopment historyTechnologyA N P R ProcessAlgorithm structureDifficultiesAccuracyApplicationControversyCircumvention techniquesA N P R in different statesReferences:A N P R Tutorial (www.anpr-tutorial.com)An introduction to A N P R (www.cctv-information.co.uk)Algorithm for license plate recognition (visl.technion.ac.il) Traffic Capture Automatic Number plate Recognition System (www.jenoptik.com)